Booster Description (#4066)
runtimeverification/haskell-backend: docs/2024-10-18-booster-description.md

- rule matching can be indeterminate. We really do not want this to happen, as it will abort rewriting and cause a fallback to Kore (or a full-stop of using the `booster-dev` server).
  Common cases include unevaluated function symbols. See [match1](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/library/Booster/Pattern/Match.hs#L191) and look for `addIndetermiante` for the exhaustive list.

#### [Checking `requires` --- the rule's pre-condition](#checking-requires)

If matching is successful, we now we have to check the rule's side-condition, aka the `requires` and `ensures` clauses. Booster represents the `requires` and `ensures` clauses as a set of boolean predicates, constituting the conjuncts. The are implicitly connected by `_andBool_`, but Booster works with them independently, which makes filtering, de-duplication and other operations more straightforward. Write your requires clauses in the conjunctive normal form!

The `requires` clause represents the logical "guard" that may impose constraints on the variables appearing on the left-hand side of the rule, thus allowing to formulate dynamic conditions of the rule's applicability.

> The requires clause check is encapsulated by the [checkRequires](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/library/Booster/Pattern/Rewrite.hs#L496) function defined in the `where`-clause of `applyRul`e. It will:
> 1. substitute the rule's requires clause with the matching substitution
> 2. check if we already have any of the conjuncts verbatim in the pattern's constrains. If so, we filter them out as known truth
> 3. simplify every conjunct individually by applying equations. This is morally equivalent to sending every conjunct as to the `"simplify"` endpoint and will use the same code path, bypassing internalisation.
> 4. filter again, as the simplified conjuncts may not be present verbatim in the known truth
> 5. if any clauses remain, it's time to fire-up Z3 and check them for validity.
>     - some rule will be rejected at that point, as their pre-condition P (the `requires` clause) is invalid, which means that the rule is applicable statically, but the dynamic conditions makes it inapplicable.
>     - some rules may have an indeterminate pre-condition P, which means that both P and its negation are satisfiable, i.e. the solver said (SAT, SAT) for (P, not P).
>       - in this case we can apply this rule conditionally, but add P into the path condition We will call `not P` the _remainder condition_ of this rule and keep track of it too

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requires clause check is encapsulated by the [checkRequires](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/library/Booster/Pattern/Rewrite.hs#L496) function defined in the `where`-clause of `applyRule`. It will:
1. substitute the rule's requires clause with the matching substitution
2. check if we already have any of the conjuncts verbatim in the pattern's path condition (`PC`). If so, we filter them out as known truth
3. simplify every conjunct individually by applying equations. This is morally equivalent to sending every conjunct as to the `"simplify"` endpoint and will use the same code path, bypassing internalisation.
4. check again whether any of the, now simplified, conjuncts  is present verbatim in the path condition
5. if any clauses remain, check all conjuncts together with Z3 for validity given the path condition.
    - some rule will be rejected at that point, as their pre-condition `P` (the `requires` clause) is false given `PC`, which means that the rule is applicable statically, but the dynamic conditions makes it inapplicable.
    - some rules may have an indeterminate pre-condition `P`, which means that both `PC /\ P` and `PC /\ not P` are `SAT` in the solver, i.e., neither `P` nor  `not P` are implied by `PC`
      - in this case we can apply this rule conditionally, but add `P` into the path condition We will call `not P` the _remainder condition_ of this rule and keep track of it too
```

        We effectively do the same if we cannot establish the validity of P due to a solver timeout, i.e. we add the predicate as an assumption. This may potentially lead to a vacuous branch as we discover more conditions further into the rewriting process.

>     -   some rules will have a valid requires clause, which means they definitely do apply and we do need to add anything else into the path condition as an assumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   some rules will have a valid requires clause, i.e., `PC => P`, which means they definitely apply and we do not need to add anything else into the path condition as an assumption.
```

See the [Booster.SMT.Interface](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/library/Booster/SMT/Interface.hs) module to learn more about how `Predicate`s are checked for satisfiable and validity using Z3.

Bottom line:

> - if `requires` is UNSAT, we do not apply the rule, just if it didn't even match;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if `requires` is found to be false, we do not apply the rule, just as if it didn't even match;
```

- rewriting finished, max depth reached
- rewriting finished, terminal rule
- rewriting finished, cut-point rule
- branch, several rules apply

#### Rewrite rule priorities and remainder predicates

The K Framework supports a powerful feature of assigning priorities to rewrite rules, which allows better structuring of the semantics.

When Booster applies rewrite rules, they are grouped by priority. The group with the higher priority applies first, and all rules are treated equally within the group.

During symbolic execution, we keep track of the current path condition --- a conjunction of logical constraints that specify an equivalence class of concrete execution states. In order to prevent state explosion, it is important to only create new symbolic states that are feasible. Priority groups enable a additional mechanism for that by enabling the semantics implementer to partition rules into complete groups, and only applying lower-priority rules under the conditions where higher-priority groups are not applicable.

> A priority group of rules gives raise to a group **coverage condition**, which is defined as a disjunction of the requires clauses of the rules in the group. If the coverage condition is valid, it means that no other rules can possibly apply. The negation of the coverage condition is called the group's coverage condition is called the **remainder condition**. The the remainder condition is unsatisfiable, then the coverage condition is valid, and the group is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A priority group of rules gives rise to a group **coverage condition**, which is defined as a disjunction of the requires clauses of the rules in the group. If the coverage condition is valid, it means that no other rules can possibly apply. The negation of the coverage condition is called the group's **remainder condition**. If the remainder condition is unsatisfiable, then the coverage condition is valid, and the group is complete.
```

Note:
a naive algorithm to compute the remainder conditions would be: after applying a group of rules, take their substituted requires clauses, disjunct and negate. However, this yields a non-minimal predicate that was not simplified and syntactically filtered, potentially making it harder for the SMT solver to solve. The algorithm described above and implemented in this PR re-uses the indeterminate results obtained while applying individual rules and simplifying/checking their individual requires clauses. This logic has been originally proposed by Sam in https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/pull/3960.

See [remainder-predicates.k](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/test/rpc-integration/resources/remainder-predicates.k) and [test-remainder-predicates](https://github.com/runtimeverification/haskell-backend/blob/master/booster/test/rpc-integration/test-remainder-predicates) for a series of integrations tests that cover the behaviour of `booster-dev` and `kore-rpc-booster`.

### [Iterating Rules](#rewriting-many-steps)

> Successful rule application does not trigger pattern-wide simplification, i.e. very far and make many steps without simplifying the pattern even ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Successful rule application does not trigger pattern-wide simplification, i.e. rewriting can proceed very far and make many steps without simplifying the pattern even once.
```
